Milton, Paradise Lost (1674)/Book IOf	Man's	first	dis	o	be	di	ence,	and	the	fruitOf	that	for	bid	den	tree	whose	mor	tal	tasteBrought	death	in	to	the	World,	and	all	our	woe,With	loss	of	E	den,	till	one	great	er	ManRe	store	us,	and	re	gain	the	bliss	ful	seat,Sing,	Heav	en	ly	Muse,	that,	on	the	se	cret	topOf	Oreb,	or	of	Si	nai,	didst	in	spireThat	shep	herd	who	first	taught	the	cho	sen	seedIn	the	be	gin	ning	how	the	heav	ens	and	earthRose	out	of	Cha	os:	or,	if	Si	on	hillDe	light	thee	more,	and	Siloa's	brook	that	flowedFast	by	the	or	a	cle	of	God,	I	thenceIn	voke	thy	aid	to	my	ad	ven	tur	ous	song,That	with	no	mid	dle	flight	in	tends	to	soarA	bove	th'	Aonian	mount,	while	it	pur	suesThings	un	at	tempt	ed	yet	in	prose	or	rhyme.And	chief	ly	thou,	O	Spir	it,	that	dost	pre	ferBe	fore	all	tem	ples	th'	up	right	heart	and	pure,In	struct	me,	for	thou	know'st;	thou	from	the	firstWast	pre	sent,	and,	with	might	y	wings	out	spread,Dove	like	sat'st	brood	ing	on	the	vast	A	byss,And	mad'st	it	preg	nant:	what	in	me	is	darkIl	lu	mine,	what	is	low	raise	and	sup	port;That,	to	the	height	of	this	great	ar	gu	ment,I	may	as	sert	E	ter	nal	Prov	i	dence,And	jus	ti	fy	the	ways	of	God	to	men.Say	first	for	Heav	en	hides	noth	ing	from	thy	view,Nor	the	deep	tract	of	Hell	say	first	what	causeMoved	our	grand	par	ents,	in	that	hap	py	state,Fa	voured	of	Heav	en	so	high	ly,	to	fall	offFrom	their	Cre	a	tor,	and	trans	gress	his	willFor	one	re	straint,	lords	of	the	World	be	sides.Who	first	se	duced	them	to	that	foul	re	volt?Th'	in	fer	nal	Ser	pent;	he	it	was	whose	guile,Stirred	up	with	en	vy	and	re	venge,	de	ceivedThe	moth	er	of	man	kind,	what	time	his	prideHad	cast	him	out	from	Heav	en,	with	all	his	hostOf	re	bel	An	gels,	by	whose	aid,	as	pir	ingTo	set	him	self	in	glo	ry	a	bove	his	peers,He	trust	ed	to	have	e	qualled	the	Most	High,If	he	op	posed,	and	with	am	bi	tious	aimA	gainst	the	throne	and	mon	ar	chy	of	God,Raised	im	pi	ous	war	in	Heav	en	and	bat	tle	proud,With	vain	at	tempt.	Him	the	Al	might	y	Pow	erHurled	head	long	flam	ing	from	th'	e	the	re	al	sky,With	hid	e	ous	ru	in	and	com	bus	tion,	downTo	bot	tom	less	per	di	tion,	there	to	dwellIn	ad	a	man	tine	chains	and	pe	nal	fire,Who	durst	de	fy	th'	Om	nip	o	tent	to	arms.Nine	times	the	space	that	meas	ures	day	and	nightTo	mor	tal	men,	he,	with	his	hor	rid	crew,Lay	van	quished,	roll	ing	in	the	fier	y	gulf,Con	found	ed,	though	im	mor	tal.	But	his	doomRe	served	him	to	more	wrath;	for	now	the	thoughtBoth	of	lost	hap	pi	ness	and	last	ing	painTor	ments	him:	round	he	throws	his	bale	ful	eyes,That	wit	nessed	huge	af	flic	tion	and	dis	may,Mixed	with	ob	du	rate	pride	and	stead	fast	hate.At	once,	as	far	as	An	gels	ken,	he	viewsThe	dis	mal	sit	u	a	tion	waste	and	wild.A	dun	geon	hor	ri	ble,	on	all	sides	round,As	one	great	fur	nace	flamed;	yet	from	those	flamesNo	light;	but	ra	ther	dark	ness	vis	i	bleServed	on	ly	to	dis	cov	er	sights	of	woe,Re	gions	of	sor	row,	dole	ful	shades,	where	peaceAnd	rest	can	nev	er	dwell,	hope	nev	er	comesThat	comes	to	all,	but	tor	ture	with	out	endStill	urg	es,	and	a	fier	y	del	uge,	fedWith	ev	er	burn	ing	sul	phur	un	con	sumed.Such	place	E	ter	nal	Jus	tice	has	pre	paredFor	those	re	bel	lious;	here	their	pris	on	or	dainedIn	ut	ter	dark	ness,	and	their	por	tion	set,As	far	re	moved	from	God	and	light	of	Heav	enAs	from	the	cen	tre	thrice	to	th'	ut	most	pole.Oh	how	un	like	the	place	from	whence	they	fell!There	the	com	pan	ions	of	his	fall,	o'erwhelmedWith	floods	and	whirl	winds	of	tem	pes	tu	ous	fire,He	soon	dis	cerns;	and,	wel	ter	ing	by	his	side,One	next	him	self	in	pow	er,	and	next	in	crime,Long	af	ter	known	in	Pal	es	tine,	and	namedBe	el	ze	bub.	To	whom	th'	Arch	En	e	my,And	thence	in	Heav	en	called	Sa	tan,	with	bold	wordsBreak	ing	the	hor	rid	si	lence,	thus	be	gan:	"If	thou	be	est	he	but	O	how	fall	en!	how	changedFrom	him	who,	in	the	hap	py	realms	of	lightClothed	with	tran	scend	ent	bright	ness,	didst	out	shineMyr	i	ads,	though	bright!	if	he	whom	mu	tu	al	league,U	nit	ed	thoughts	and	coun	sels,	e	qual	hopeAnd	haz	ard	in	the	glo	ri	ous	en	ter	priseJoined	with	me	once,	now	mis	er	y	hath	joinedIn	e	qual	ru	in;	in	to	what	pit	thou	se	estFrom	what	height	fall	en:	so	much	the	strong	er	provedHe	with	his	thun	der;	and	till	then	who	knewThe	force	of	those	dire	arms?	Yet	not	for	those,Nor	what	the	po	tent	Vic	tor	in	his	rageCan	else	in	flict,	do	I	re	pent,	or	change,Though	changed	in	out	ward	lus	tre,	that	fixed	mind,And	high	dis	dain	from	sense	of	in	jured	mer	it,That	with	the	Might	i	est	raised	me	to	con	tend,And	to	the	fierce	con	ten	tions	brought	a	longIn	nu	mer	a	ble	force	of	Spir	its	armed,That	durst	dis	like	his	reign,	and,	me	pre	fer	ring,His	ut	most	pow	er	with	ad	verse	pow	er	op	posedIn	du	bi	ous	bat	tle	on	the	plains	of	Heav	en,And	shook	his	throne.	What	though	the	field	be	lost?All	is	not	lost	the	un	con	quer	a	ble	will,And	stud	y	of	re	venge,	im	mor	tal	hate,And	cour	age	nev	er	to	sub	mit	or	yield:And	what	is	else	not	to	be	o	ver	come?That	glo	ry	nev	er	shall	his	wrath	or	mightEx	tort	from	me.	To	bow	and	sue	for	graceWith	sup	pli	ant	knee,	and	de	i	fy	his	pow	erWho,	from	the	ter	ror	of	this	arm,	so	lateDoubt	ed	his	em	pire	that	were	low	in	deed;That	were	an	ig	no	min	y	and	shame	be	neathThis	down	fall;	since,	by	fate,	the	strength	of	Gods,And	this	em	pyr	e	al	sub	stance,	can	not	fail;Since,	through	ex	pe	ri	ence	of	this	great	e	vent,In	arms	not	worse,	in	fore	sight	much	ad	vanced,We	may	with	more	suc	cess	ful	hope	re	solveTo	wage	by	force	or	guile	e	ter	nal	war,Ir	rec	on	cil	a	ble	to	our	grand	Foe,Who	now	tri	umphs,	and	in	th'	ex	cess	of	joySole	reign	ing	holds	the	tyr	an	ny	of	Heav	en."So	spake	th'	a	pos	tate	An	gel,	though	in	pain,Vaunt	ing	a	loud,	but	racked	with	deep	de	spair;And	him	thus	an	swered	soon	his	bold	com	peer:	"O	Prince,	O	Chief	of	man	y	throned	Pow	ersThat	led	th'	em	bat	tled	Ser	a	phim	to	warUn	der	thy	con	duct,	and,	in	dread	ful	deedsFear	less,	en	dan	gered	Heaven's	per	pet	u	al	King,And	put	to	proof	his	high	su	prem	a	cy,Wheth	er	up	held	by	strength,	or	chance,	or	fate,Too	well	I	see	and	rue	the	dire	e	ventThat,	with	sad	o	ver	throw	and	foul	de	feat,Hath	lost	us	Heav	en,	and	all	this	might	y	hostIn	hor	ri	ble	de	struc	tion	laid	thus	low,As	far	as	Gods	and	heav	en	ly	Es	senc	esCan	per	ish:	for	the	mind	and	spir	it	re	mainsIn	vin	ci	ble,	and	vig	our	soon	re	turns,Though	all	our	glo	ry	ex	tinct,	and	hap	py	stateHere	swal	lowed	up	in	end	less	mis	er	y.But	what	if	he	our	Con	quer	or	(whom	I	nowOf	force	be	lieve	al	might	y,	since	no	lessThan	such	could	have	o'erpowered	such	force	as	ours)Have	left	us	this	our	spir	it	and	strength	en	tire,Strong	ly	to	suf	fer	and	sup	port	our	pains,That	we	may	so	suf	fice	his	venge	ful	ire,Or	do	him	might	i	er	ser	vice	as	his	thrallsBy	right	of	war,	what	e'er	his	busi	ness	be,Here	in	the	heart	of	Hell	to	work	in	fire,Or	do	his	er	rands	in	the	gloom	y	Deep?What	can	it	then	a	vail	though	yet	we	feelStrength	un	di	min	ished,	or	e	ter	nal	be	ingTo	un	der	go	e	ter	nal	pun	ish	ment?"Where	to	with	speed	y	words	th'	Arch	Fiend	re	plied:	"Fall	en	Cher	ub,	to	be	weak	is	mis	er	a	ble,Do	ing	or	suf	fer	ing:	but	of	this	be	sure	To	do	aught	good	nev	er	will	be	our	task,But	ev	er	to	do	ill	our	sole	de	light,As	be	ing	the	con	tra	ry	to	his	high	willWhom	we	re	sist.	If	then	his	prov	i	denceOut	of	our	e	vil	seek	to	bring	forth	good,Our	la	bour	must	be	to	per	vert	that	end,And	out	of	good	still	to	find	means	of	e	vil;Which	oft	times	may	suc	ceed	so	as	per	hapsShall	grieve	him,	if	I	fail	not,	and	dis	turbHis	in	most	coun	sels	from	their	des	tined	aim.But	see!	the	an	gry	Vic	tor	hath	re	calledHis	min	is	ters	of	venge	ance	and	pur	suitBack	to	the	gates	of	Heav	en:	the	sul	phur	ous	hail,Shot	af	ter	us	in	storm,	o'erblown	hath	laidThe	fier	y	surge	that	from	the	prec	i	piceOf	Heav	en	re	ceived	us	fall	ing;	and	the	thun	der,Winged	with	red	light	ning	and	im	pet	u	ous	rage,Per	haps	hath	spent	his	shafts,	and	ceas	es	nowTo	bel	low	through	the	vast	and	bound	less	Deep.Let	us	not	slip	th'	oc	ca	sion,	wheth	er	scornOr	sa	ti	ate	fu	ry	yield	it	from	our	Foe.Se	est	thou	yon	drear	y	plain,	for	lorn	and	wild,The	seat	of	des	o	la	tion,	void	of	light,Save	what	the	glim	mer	ing	of	these	liv	id	flamesCasts	pale	and	dread	ful?	Thith	er	let	us	tendFrom	off	the	toss	ing	of	these	fier	y	waves;There	rest,	if	an	y	rest	can	har	bour	there;And,	re	as	sem	bl	ing	our	af	flict	ed	pow	ers,Con	sult	how	we	may	hence	forth	most	of	fendOur	en	e	my,	our	own	loss	how	re	pair,How	o	ver	come	this	dire	ca	lam	i	ty,What	re	in	force	ment	we	may	gain	from	hope,If	not,	what	res	o	lu	tion	from	de	spair."Thus	Sa	tan,	talk	ing	to	his	near	est	mate,With	head	up	lift	a	bove	the	wave,	and	eyesThat	spar	kl	ing	blazed;	his	oth	er	parts	be	sidesProne	on	the	flood,	ex	tend	ed	long	and	large,Lay	float	ing	man	y	a	rood,	in	bulk	as	hugeAs	whom	the	fa	bles	name	of	mon	strous	size,Titanian	or	Earth	born,	that	warred	on	Jove,Briareos	or	Ty	phon,	whom	the	denBy	an	cient	Tar	sus	held,	or	that	sea	beastLe	vi	a	than,	which	God	of	all	his	worksCre	at	ed	hug	est	that	swim	th'	o	cean	stream.Him,	hap	ly	slum	ber	ing	on	the	Nor	way	foam,The	pi	lot	of	some	small	night	found	ered	skiff,Deem	ing	some	is	land,	oft,	as	seamen	tell,With	fixed	an	chor	in	his	scal	y	rind,Moors	by	his	side	un	der	the	lee,	while	nightIn	vests	the	sea,	and	wished	morn	de	lays.So	stretched	out	huge	in	length	the	Arch	fiend	lay,Chained	on	the	burn	ing	lake;	nor	ev	er	thenceHad	ris	en,	or	heaved	his	head,	but	that	the	willAnd	high	per	mis	sion	of	all	rul	ing	Heav	enLeft	him	at	large	to	his	own	dark	de	signs,That	with	re	it	er	at	ed	crimes	he	mightHeap	on	him	self	dam	na	tion,	while	he	soughtE	vil	to	oth	ers,	and	en	raged	might	seeHow	all	his	mal	ice	served	but	to	bring	forthIn	fi	nite	good	ness,	grace,	and	mer	cy,	shewnOn	Man	by	him	se	duced,	but	on	him	selfTre	ble	con	fu	sion,	wrath,	and	venge	ance	poured.Forth	with	up	right	he	rears	from	off	the	poolHis	might	y	stat	ure;	on	each	hand	the	flamesDriv	en	back	ward	slope	their	point	ing	spires,	and,	rolledIn	bil	lows,	leave	i'	th'	midst	a	hor	rid	va	le.Then	with	ex	pand	ed	wings	he	steers	his	flightA	loft,	in	cum	bent	on	the	dusk	y	air,That	felt	un	u	su	al	weight;	till	on	dry	landHe	lights	if	it	were	land	that	ev	er	burnedWith	sol	id,	as	the	lake	with	liq	uid	fire,And	such	ap	peared	in	hue	as	when	the	forceOf	sub	ter	ra	ne	an	wind	trans	ports	a	hillTorn	from	Pe	lo	rus,	or	the	shat	tered	sideOf	thun	der	ing	Et	na,	whose	com	bus	ti	bleAnd	fu	elled	en	trails,	thence	con	ceiv	ing	fire,Sub	limed	with	min	er	al	fu	ry,	aid	the	winds,And	leave	a	singed	bot	tom	all	in	volvedWith	stench	and	smoke.	Such	rest	ing	found	the	soleOf	un	blest	feet.	Him	fol	lowed	his	next	mate;Both	glo	ry	ing	to	have	scaped	the	Styg	i	an	floodAs	gods,	and	by	their	own	re	cov	ered	strength,Not	by	the	suf	fer	ance	of	su	per	nal	Pow	er."Is	this	the	re	gion,	this	the	soil,	the	clime,"Said	then	the	lost	Arch	an	gel,	"this	the	seatThat	we	must	change	for	Heav	en?	this	mourn	ful	gloomFor	that	ce	les	ti	al	light?	Be	it	so,	since	heWho	now	is	sov	er	eign	can	dis	pose	and	bidWhat	shall	be	right:	far	thest	from	him	is	bestWhom	rea	son	hath	e	qualled,	force	hath	made	su	premeA	bove	his	e	quals.	Fare	well,	hap	py	fields,Where	joy	for	ev	er	dwells!	Hail,	hor	rors!	hail,In	fer	nal	world!	and	thou,	pro	found	est	Hell,Re	ceive	thy	new	pos	ses	sor	one	who	bringsA	mind	not	to	be	changed	by	place	or	time.The	mind	is	its	own	place,	and	in	it	selfCan	make	a	Heav	en	of	Hell,	a	Hell	of	Heav	en.What	mat	ter	where,	if	I	be	still	the	same,And	what	I	should	be,	all	but	less	than	heWhom	thun	der	hath	made	great	er?	Here	at	leastWe	shall	be	free;	th'	Al	might	y	hath	not	builtHere	for	his	en	vy,	will	not	drive	us	hence:Here	we	may	reign	se	cure;	and,	in	my	choice,To	reign	is	worth	am	bi	tion,	though	in	Hell:Bet	ter	to	reign	in	Hell	than	serve	in	Heav	en.But	where	fore	let	we	then	our	faith	ful	friends,Th'	as	so	ci	ates	and	co	part	ners	of	our	loss,Lie	thus	a	ston	ished	on	th'	o	bliv	i	ous	pool,And	call	them	not	to	share	with	us	their	partIn	this	un	hap	py	man	sion,	or	once	moreWith	ral	lied	arms	to	try	what	may	be	yetRe	gained	in	Heav	en,	or	what	more	lost	in	Hell?"So	Sa	tan	spake;	and	him	Be	el	ze	bubThus	an	swered:	"Lead	er	of	those	ar	mies	brightWhich,	but	th'	Om	nip	o	tent,	none	could	have	foiled!If	once	they	hear	that	voice,	their	live	li	est	pledgeOf	hope	in	fears	and	dan	gers	heard	so	oftIn	worst	ex	tremes,	and	on	the	per	i	lous	edgeOf	bat	tle,	when	it	raged,	in	all	as	saultsTheir	sur	est	sig	nal	they	will	soon	re	su	meNew	cour	age	and	re	vive,	though	now	they	lieGrov	el	ling	and	pros	trate	on	yon	lake	of	fire,As	we	ere	while,	a	stound	ed	and	a	mazed;No	won	der,	fall	en	such	a	per	ni	cious	height!"He	scarce	had	ceased	when	the	su	pe	ri	or	FiendWas	mov	ing	to	ward	the	shore;	his	pon	der	ous	shield,E	the	re	al	tem	per,	mass	y,	large,	and	round,Be	hind	him	cast.	The	broad	cir	cum	fer	enceHung	on	his	shoul	ders	like	the	moon,	whose	orbThrough	op	tic	glass	the	Tus	can	art	ist	viewsAt	eve	ning,	from	the	top	of	Fesole,Or	in	Valdarno,	to	de	scry	new	lands,Riv	ers,	or	moun	tains,	in	her	spot	ty	globe.His	spear	to	e	qual	which	the	tall	est	pineHewn	on	Nor	we	gian	hills,	to	be	the	mastOf	some	great	ammiral,	were	but	a	wand	He	walked	with,	to	sup	port	un	eas	y	stepsO	ver	the	burn	ing	marl,	not	like	those	stepsOn	Heaven's	az	ure;	and	the	tor	rid	climeSmote	on	him	sore	be	sides,	vault	ed	with	fire.Nath	less	he	so	en	dured,	till	on	the	beachOf	that	in	flamed	sea	he	stood,	and	calledHis	le	gions	An	gel	Forms,	who	lay	en	trancedThick	as	au	tum	nal	leaves	that	strow	the	brooksIn	Val	lom	bro	sa,	where	th'	E	tru	ri	an	shadesHigh	o	ver	arched	em	bow	er;	or	scat	tered	sedgeA	float,	when	with	fierce	winds	O	ri	on	armedHath	vexed	the	Red	Sea	coast,	whose	waves	o'erthrewBu	si	ris	and	his	Mem	phi	an	chiv	al	ry,While	with	per	fid	i	ous	ha	tred	they	pur	suedThe	sojourners	of	Go	shen,	who	be	heldFrom	the	safe	shore	their	float	ing	car	cas	esAnd	bro	ken	char	i	ot	wheels.	So	thick	bestrown,Ab	ject	and	lost,	lay	these,	cov	er	ing	the	flood,Un	der	a	maze	ment	of	their	hid	e	ous	change.He	called	so	loud	that	all	the	hol	low	deepOf	Hell	re	sound	ed:	"Princ	es,	Po	ten	tates,War	ri	ors,	the	Flow	er	of	Heav	en	once	yours;	now	lost,If	such	a	ston	ish	ment	as	this	can	seizeE	ter	nal	Spir	its!	Or	have	ye	cho	sen	this	placeAf	ter	the	toil	of	bat	tle	to	re	poseYour	wea	ried	vir	tue,	for	the	ease	you	findTo	slum	ber	here,	as	in	the	va	les	of	Heav	en?Or	in	this	ab	ject	pos	ture	have	ye	swornTo	a	dore	the	Con	quer	or,	who	now	be	holdsCher	ub	and	Ser	aph	roll	ing	in	the	floodWith	scat	tered	arms	and	en	signs,	till	a	nonHis	swift	pur	su	ers	from	Heav	en	gates	dis	cernTh'	ad	van	tage,	and,	de	scend	ing,	tread	us	downThus	droop	ing,	or	with	linked	thun	der	boltsTrans	fix	us	to	the	bot	tom	of	this	gulf?A	wake,	a	rise,	or	be	for	ev	er	fall	en!"They	heard,	and	were	a	bashed,	and	up	they	sprungUp	on	the	wing,	as	when	men	wont	to	watchOn	du	ty,	sleep	ing	found	by	whom	they	dread,Rouse	and	be	stir	them	selves	ere	well	a	wake.Nor	did	they	not	per	ceive	the	e	vil	plightIn	which	they	were,	or	the	fierce	pains	not	feel;Yet	to	their	General's	voice	they	soon	o	beyedIn	nu	mer	a	ble.	As	when	the	po	tent	rodOf	Amram's	son,	in	Egypt's	e	vil	day,Waved	round	the	coast,	up	called	a	pitch	y	cloudOf	lo	custs,	warp	ing	on	the	east	ern	wind,That	o'er	the	realm	of	im	pi	ous	Phar	aoh	hungLike	Night,	and	dark	ened	all	the	land	of	Nile;So	num	ber	less	were	those	bad	An	gels	seenHov	er	ing	on	wing	un	der	the	cope	of	Hell,'Twixt	up	per,	neth	er,	and	sur	round	ing	fires;Till,	as	a	sig	nal	giv	en,	th'	up	lift	ed	spearOf	their	great	Sul	tan	wav	ing	to	di	rectTheir	course,	in	e	ven	bal	ance	down	they	lightOn	the	firm	brim	stone,	and	fill	all	the	plain:A	mul	ti	tude	like	which	the	pop	u	lous	NorthPoured	nev	er	from	her	fro	zen	loins	to	passRhe	ne	or	the	Danaw,	when	her	bar	ba	rous	sonsCame	like	a	del	uge	on	the	South,	and	spreadBe	neath	Gi	bral	tar	to	the	Lib	y	an	sands.Forth	with,	from	eve	ry	squad	ron	and	each	band,The	heads	and	lead	ers	thith	er	haste	where	stoodTheir	great	Com	mand	er	god	like	Shapes,	and	FormsEx	cel	ling	hu	man;	prince	ly	Dig	ni	ties;And	Pow	ers	that	erst	in	Heav	en	sat	on	thrones,Though	on	their	names	in	Heav	en	ly	re	cords	nowBe	no	me	mo	ri	al,	blot	ted	out	and	rASedBy	their	re	bel	lion	from	the	Books	of	Life.Nor	had	they	yet	a	mong	the	sons	of	EveGot	them	new	names,	till,	wan	der	ing	o'er	the	earth,Through	God's	high	suf	fer	ance	for	the	tri	al	of	man,By	fal	si	ties	and	lies	the	great	est	partOf	man	kind	they	cor	rupt	ed	to	for	sakeGod	their	Cre	a	tor,	and	th'	in	vis	i	bleGlo	ry	of	him	that	made	them	to	trans	formOft	to	the	im	age	of	a	brute,	a	dornedWith	gay	re	li	gions	full	of	pomp	and	gold,And	dev	ils	to	a	dore	for	de	i	ties:Then	were	they	known	to	men	by	var	i	ous	names,And	var	i	ous	i	dols	through	the	hea	then	world.Say,	Muse,	their	names	then	known,	who	first,	who	last,Roused	from	the	slum	ber	on	that	fier	y	couch,At	their	great	Emperor's	call,	as	next	in	worthCame	sin	gly	where	he	stood	on	the	bare	strand,While	the	pro	mis	cu	ous	crowd	stood	yet	a	loof?The	chief	were	those	who,	from	the	pit	of	HellRoam	ing	to	seek	their	prey	on	Earth,	durst	fixTheir	seats,	long	af	ter,	next	the	seat	of	God,Their	al	tars	by	his	al	tar,	gods	a	doredA	mong	the	na	tions	round,	and	durst	a	bideJe	ho	vah	thun	der	ing	out	of	Si	on,	thronedBe	tween	the	Cher	u	bim;	yea,	of	ten	placedWith	in	his	sanc	tu	ar	y	it	self	their	shrines,A	bom	i	na	tions;	and	with	curs	ed	thingsHis	ho	ly	rites	and	sol	emn	feasts	pro	faned,And	with	their	dark	ness	durst	af	front	his	light.First,	Mo	loch,	hor	rid	king,	be	smeared	with	bloodOf	hu	man	sac	ri	fice,	and	par	ents'	tears;Though,	for	the	noise	of	drums	and	tim	brels	loud,Their	children's	cries	un	heard	that	passed	through	fireTo	his	grim	i	dol.	Him	the	Am	mon	iteWor	shiped	in	Rabba	and	her	wa	ter	y	plain,In	Argob	and	in	Basan,	to	the	streamOf	ut	most	Arnon.	Nor	con	tent	with	suchAu	da	cious	neigh	bour	hood,	the	wis	est	heartOf	Sol	o	mon	he	led	by	fraud	to	buildHis	tem	ple	right	a	gainst	the	tem	ple	of	GodOn	that	op	pro	bri	ous	hill,	and	made	his	groveThe	pleas	ant	val	ley	of	Hinnom,	To	phet	thenceAnd	black	Ge	hen	na	called,	the	type	of	Hell.Next	Chemos,	th'	ob	scene	dread	of	Moab's	sons,From	Aroar	to	Ne	bo	and	the	wildOf	south	most	Abarim;	in	HesebonAnd	Horonaim,	Seon's	re	al,	be	yondThe	flow	er	y	dale	of	Sibma	clad	with	vines,And	Eleale	to	th'	As	phal	tic	Pool:Peor	his	oth	er	name,	when	he	en	ticedIs	ra	el	in	Sittim,	on	their	march	from	Nile,To	do	him	wan	ton	rites,	which	cost	them	woe.Yet	thence	his	lust	ful	or	gies	he	en	largedE	ven	to	that	hill	of	scan	dal,	by	the	groveOf	Mo	loch	hom	i	cide,	lust	hard	by	hate,Till	good	Jo	si	ah	drove	them	thence	to	Hell.With	these	came	they	who,	from	the	bor	der	ing	floodOf	old	Eu	phra	tes	to	the	brook	that	partsE	gypt	from	Syr	i	an	ground,	had	gen	er	al	namesOf	Ba	al	im	and	Ashtaroth	those	male,These	fem	i	nine.	For	Spir	its,	when	they	please,Can	ei	ther	sex	as	sume,	or	both;	so	softAnd	un	com	pound	ed	is	their	es	sence	pure,Not	tried	or	man	a	cled	with	joint	or	limb,Nor	found	ed	on	the	brit	tle	strength	of	bones,Like	cum	brous	flesh;	but,	in	what	shape	they	choose,Di	lat	ed	or	con	densed,	bright	or	ob	scure,Can	ex	e	cute	their	air	y	pur	pos	es,And	works	of	love	or	en	mi	ty	ful	fil.For	those	the	race	of	Is	ra	el	oft	for	sookTheir	Liv	ing	Strength,	and	un	fre	quent	ed	leftHis	right	eous	al	tar,	bow	ing	low	ly	downTo	bes	ti	al	gods;	for	which	their	heads	as	lowBowed	down	in	bat	tle,	sunk	be	fore	the	spearOf	des	pi	ca	ble	foes.	With	these	in	troopCame	Astoreth,	whom	the	Phoe	ni	ci	ans	calledAs	tar	te,	queen	of	heav	en,	with	cres	cent	horns;To	whose	bright	im	age	night	ly	by	the	moonSidonian	vir	gins	paid	their	vows	and	songs;In	Si	on	al	so	not	un	sung,	where	stoodHer	tem	ple	on	th'	of	fen	sive	moun	tain,	builtBy	that	ux	o	ri	ous	king	whose	heart,	though	large,Be	guiled	by	fair	i	dol	a	tress	es,	fellTo	i	dols	foul.	Tham	muz	came	next	be	hind,Whose	an	nu	al	wound	in	Leb	a	non	al	luredThe	Syr	i	an	dam	sels	to	la	ment	his	fateIn	am	o	rous	dit	ties	all	a	summer's	day,While	smooth	A	do	nis	from	his	na	tive	rockRan	pur	ple	to	the	sea,	sup	posed	with	bloodOf	Tham	muz	year	ly	wound	ed:	the	love	taleIn	fect	ed	Sion's	daugh	ters	with	like	heat,Whose	wan	ton	pas	sions	in	the	sa	cred	porchE	ze	ki	el	saw,	when,	by	the	vi	sion	led,His	eye	sur	veyed	the	dark	i	dol	a	triesOf	al	ien	at	ed	Ju	dah.	Next	came	oneWho	mourned	in	ear	nest,	when	the	cap	tive	arkMaimed	his	brute	im	age,	head	and	hands	lopt	off,In	his	own	tem	ple,	on	the	grunsel	edge,Where	he	fell	flat	and	shamed	his	worshippers:Da	gon	his	name,	sea	mon	ster,	up	ward	manAnd	down	ward	fish;	yet	had	his	tem	ple	highReared	in	Azotus,	dread	ed	through	the	coastOf	Pal	es	tine,	in	Gath	and	Ascalon,And	Accaron	and	Gaza's	fron	tier	bounds.Him	fol	lowed	Rimmon,	whose	de	light	ful	seatWas	fair	Da	mas	cus,	on	the	fer	tile	banksOf	Abbana	and	Pharphar,	lu	cid	streams.He	al	so	a	gainst	the	house	of	God	was	bold:A	lep	er	once	he	lost,	and	gained	a	king	A	haz,	his	sot	tish	con	quer	or,	whom	he	drewGod's	al	tar	to	dis	par	age	and	dis	placeFor	one	of	Syr	i	an	mode,	where	on	to	burnHis	o	di	ous	of	fer	ings,	and	a	dore	the	godsWhom	he	had	van	quished.	Af	ter	these	ap	pearedA	crew	who,	un	der	names	of	old	re	nown	O	si	ris,	I	sis,	Orus,	and	their	train	With	mon	strous	shapes	and	sor	cer	ies	a	busedFa	nat	ic	E	gypt	and	her	priests	to	seekTheir	wan	der	ing	gods	dis	guised	in	brut	ish	formsRa	ther	than	hu	man.	Nor	did	Is	ra	el	scapeTh'	in	fec	tion,	when	their	bor	rowed	gold	com	posedThe	calf	in	Oreb;	and	the	re	bel	kingDou	bled	that	sin	in	Beth	el	and	in	Dan,Lik	en	ing	his	Mak	er	to	the	grazed	ox	Je	ho	vah,	who,	in	one	night,	when	he	passedFrom	E	gypt	march	ing,	e	qualled	with	one	strokeBoth	her	first	born	and	all	her	bleat	ing	gods.Be	li	al	came	last;	than	whom	a	Spir	it	more	lewdFell	not	from	Heav	en,	or	more	gross	to	loveVice	for	it	self.	To	him	no	tem	ple	stoodOr	al	tar	smoked;	yet	who	more	oft	than	heIn	tem	ples	and	at	al	tars,	when	the	priestTurns	a	the	ist,	as	did	E	lis	sons,	who	filledWith	lust	and	vi	o	lence	the	house	of	God?In	courts	and	pal	ac	es	he	al	so	reigns,And	in	lux	u	ri	ous	cit	ies,	where	the	noiseOf	ri	ot	as	cends	a	bove	their	loft	i	est	tow	ers,And	in	ju	ry	and	out	rage;	and,	when	nightDark	ens	the	streets,	then	wan	der	forth	the	sonsOf	Be	li	al,	flown	with	in	so	lence	and	wine.Wit	ness	the	streets	of	Sod	om,	and	that	nightIn	Gibeah,	when	the	hos	pi	ta	ble	doorEx	posed	a	ma	tron,	to	a	void	worse	rape.These	were	the	prime	in	or	der	and	in	might:The	rest	were	long	to	tell;	though	far	re	nownedTh'	I	o	ni	an	gods	of	Javan's	is	sue	heldGods,	yet	con	fessed	lat	er	than	Heav	en	and	Earth,Their	boast	ed	par	ents;	Ti	tan,	Heaven's	first	born,With	his	e	nor	mous	brood,	and	birth	right	seizedBy	young	er	Sat	urn:	he	from	might	i	er	Jove,His	own	and	Rhea's	son,	like	mea	sure	found;So	Jove	u	surp	ing	reigned.	These,	first	in	CreteAnd	IDA	known,	thence	on	the	snow	y	topOf	cold	O	lym	pus	ruled	the	mid	dle	air,Their	high	est	heav	en;	or	on	the	Del	phi	an	cliff,Or	in	Do	do	na,	and	through	all	the	boundsOf	Dor	ic	land;	or	who	with	Sat	urn	oldFled	o	ver	Adria	to	th'	Hes	pe	ri	an	fields,And	o'er	the	Celt	ic	roamed	the	ut	most	Isles.All	these	and	more	came	flock	ing;	but	with	looksDown	cast	and	damp;	yet	such	where	in	ap	pearedOb	scure	some	glimpse	of	joy	to	have	found	their	ChiefNot	in	de	spair,	to	have	found	them	selves	not	lostIn	loss	it	self;	which	on	his	coun	te	nance	castLike	doubt	ful	hue.	But	he,	his	wont	ed	prideSoon	rec	ol	lect	ing,	with	high	words,	that	boreSem	blance	of	worth,	not	sub	stance,	gen	tly	raisedTheir	faint	ing	cour	age,	and	dis	pelled	their	fears.Then	straight	com	mands	that,	at	the	war	like	soundOf	trum	pets	loud	and	clar	i	ons,	be	up	rearedHis	might	y	stand	ard.	That	proud	honour	claimedA	za	zel	as	his	right,	a	Cher	ub	tall:Who	forth	with	from	the	glit	ter	ing	staff	un	furledTh'	im	pe	ri	al	en	sign;	which,	full	high	ad	vanced,Shone	like	a	me	te	or	stream	ing	to	the	wind,With	gems	and	gold	en	lus	tre	rich	em	blazed,Se	raph	ic	arms	and	tro	phies;	all	the	whileSo	no	rous	met	al	blow	ing	mar	tial	sounds:At	which	the	u	ni	ver	sal	host	up	sentA	shout	that	tore	Hell's	con	cave,	and	be	yondFright	ed	the	reign	of	Cha	os	and	old	Night.All	in	a	mo	ment	through	the	gloom	were	seenTen	thou	sand	ban	ners	rise	in	to	the	air,With	o	ri	ent	co	lours	wav	ing:	with	them	roseA	for	est	huge	of	spears;	and	throng	ing	helmsAp	peared,	and	ser	ried	shields	in	thick	ar	rayOf	depth	im	meas	ur	a	ble.	A	non	they	moveIn	per	fect	pha	lanx	to	the	Do	ri	an	moodOf	flutes	and	soft	re	cord	ers	such	as	raisedTo	height	of	nobl	est	tem	per	he	roes	oldArm	ing	to	bat	tle,	and	in	stead	of	rageDe	lib	er	ate	val	our	breathed,	firm,	and	un	movedWith	dread	of	death	to	flight	or	foul	re	treat;Nor	want	ing	pow	er	to	mit	i	gate	and	swageWith	sol	emn	touch	es	trou	bled	thoughts,	and	chaseAn	guish	and	doubt	and	fear	and	sor	row	and	painFrom	mor	tal	or	im	mor	tal	minds.	Thus	they,Breath	ing	u	nit	ed	force	with	fixed	thought,Moved	on	in	si	lence	to	soft	pipes	that	charmedTheir	pain	ful	steps	o'er	the	burnt	soil.	And	nowAd	vanced	in	view	they	stand	a	hor	rid	frontOf	dread	ful	length	and	daz	zl	ing	arms,	in	guiseOf	war	ri	ors	old,	with	or	dered	spear	and	shield,A	wait	ing	what	com	mand	their	might	y	ChiefHad	to	im	pose.	He	through	the	armed	filesDarts	his	ex	pe	ri	enced	eye,	and	soon	trav	erseThe	whole	bat	tal	i	on	views	their	or	der	due,Their	vis	ag	es	and	stat	ure	as	of	gods;Their	num	ber	last	he	sums.	And	now	his	heartDis	tends	with	pride,	and,	hard	en	ing	in	his	strength,Glo	ries:	for	nev	er,	since	cre	at	ed	Man,Met	such	em	bod	ied	force	as,	named	with	these,Could	mer	it	more	than	that	small	in	fan	tryWarred	on	by	cranes	though	all	the	gi	ant	broodOf	Phlegra	with	th'	he	ro	ic	race	were	joinedThat	fought	at	Thebes	and	Il	i	um,	on	each	sideMixed	with	auxiliar	gods;	and	what	re	soundsIn	fa	ble	or	ro	mance	of	Uther's	son,Begirt	with	Brit	ish	and	Ar	mor	ic	knights;And	all	who	since,	bap	tized	or	in	fi	del,Joust	ed	in	Aspramont,	or	Montalban,Damasco,	or	Marocco,	or	Trebisond,Or	whom	Biserta	sent	from	Af	ric	shoreWhen	Charlemain	with	all	his	peer	age	fellBy	Fontarabbia.	Thus	far	these	be	yondCom	pare	of	mor	tal	prow	ess,	yet	ob	servedTheir	dread	Com	mand	er.	He,	a	bove	the	restIn	shape	and	ges	ture	proud	ly	em	i	nent,Stood	like	a	tow	er.	His	form	had	yet	not	lostAll	her	o	rig	i	nal	bright	ness,	nor	ap	pearedLess	than	Arch	an	gel	ru	ined,	and	th'	ex	cessOf	glo	ry	ob	scured:	as	when	the	sun	new	ris	enLooks	through	the	hor	i	zon	tal	mist	y	airShorn	of	his	beams,	or,	from	be	hind	the	moon,In	dim	e	clipse,	dis	as	trous	twi	light	shedsOn	half	the	na	tions,	and	with	fear	of	changePer	plexes	mon	archs.	Dark	ened	so,	yet	shoneA	bove	them	all	th'	Arch	an	gel:	but	his	faceDeep	scars	of	thun	der	had	in	trenched,	and	careSat	on	his	fad	ed	cheek,	but	un	der	browsOf	daunt	less	cour	age,	and	con	sid	er	ate	prideWait	ing	re	venge.	Cru	el	his	eye,	but	castSigns	of	re	morse	and	pas	sion,	to	be	holdThe	fel	lows	of	his	crime,	the	fol	low	ers	ra	ther(Far	oth	er	once	be	held	in	bliss),	con	demnedFor	ev	er	now	to	have	their	lot	in	pain	Mil	lions	of	Spir	its	for	his	fault	a	mercedOf	Heav	en,	and	from	e	ter	nal	splen	dours	flungFor	his	re	volt	yet	faith	ful	how	they	stood,Their	glo	ry	with	ered;	as,	when	heaven's	fireHath	scathed	the	for	est	oaks	or	moun	tain	pines,With	singed	top	their	state	ly	growth,	though	bare,Stands	on	the	blast	ed	heath.	He	now	pre	paredTo	speak;	where	at	their	dou	bled	ranks	they	bendFrom	wing	to	wing,	and	half	en	close	him	roundWith	all	his	peers:	at	ten	tion	held	them	mute.Thrice	he	as	sayed,	and	thrice,	in	spite	of	scorn,Tears,	such	as	An	gels	weep,	burst	forth:	at	lastWords	interwove	with	sighs	found	out	their	way:	"O	myr	i	ads	of	im	mor	tal	Spir	its!	O	Pow	ersMatch	less,	but	with	th'	Al	might	y!	and	that	strifeWas	not	in	glo	ri	ous,	though	th'	e	vent	was	dire,As	this	place	tes	ti	fies,	and	this	dire	change,Hate	ful	to	ut	ter.	But	what	pow	er	of	mind,Forseeing	or	pres	ag	ing,	from	the	depthOf	knowl	edge	past	or	pre	sent,	could	have	fearedHow	such	u	nit	ed	force	of	gods,	how	suchAs	stood	like	these,	could	ev	er	know	re	pulse?For	who	can	yet	be	lieve,	though	af	ter	loss,That	all	these	pu	is	sant	le	gions,	whose	ex	ileHath	emp	tied	Heav	en,	shall	fail	to	re	as	cend,Self	raised,	and	re	pos	sess	their	na	tive	seat?For	me,	be	wit	ness	all	the	host	of	Heav	en,If	coun	sels	dif	fer	ent,	or	dan	ger	shunnedBy	me,	have	lost	our	hopes.	But	he	who	reignsMon	arch	in	Heav	en	till	then	as	one	se	cureSat	on	his	throne,	up	held	by	old	re	pute,Con	sent	or	cus	tom,	and	his	re	gal	statePut	forth	at	full,	but	still	his	strength	con	cealed	Which	tempt	ed	our	at	tempt,	and	wrought	our	fall.Hence	forth	his	might	we	know,	and	know	our	own,So	as	not	ei	ther	to	pro	voke,	or	dreadNew	war	pro	voked:	our	bet	ter	part	re	mainsTo	work	in	close	de	sign,	by	fraud	or	guile,What	force	ef	fect	ed	not;	that	he	no	lessAt	length	from	us	may	find,	who	o	ver	comesBy	force	hath	o	ver	come	but	half	his	foe.Space	may	pro	duce	new	Worlds;	where	of	so	rifeThere	went	a	fame	in	Heav	en	that	he	ere	longIn	tend	ed	to	cre	ate,	and	there	in	plantA	gen	er	a	tion	whom	his	choice	re	gardShould	fa	vour	e	qual	to	the	Sons	of	Heav	en.Thith	er,	if	but	to	pry,	shall	be	per	hapsOur	first	e	rup	tion	thith	er,	or	else	where;For	this	in	fer	nal	pit	shall	nev	er	holdCe	les	ti	al	Spir	its	in	bond	age,	nor	th'	A	byssLong	un	der	dark	ness	cov	er.	But	these	thoughtsFull	coun	sel	must	ma	ture.	Peace	is	de	spaired;For	who	can	think	sub	mis	sion?	War,	then,	warO	pen	or	un	der	stood,	must	be	re	solved."He	spake;	and,	to	con	firm	his	words,	out	flewMil	lions	of	flam	ing	swords,	drawn	from	the	thighsOf	might	y	Cher	u	bim;	the	sud	den	blazeFar	round	il	lu	mined	Hell.	High	ly	they	ragedA	gainst	the	High	est,	and	fierce	with	grasped	armsClashed	on	their	sound	ing	shields	the	din	of	war,Hurl	ing	de	fi	ance	to	ward	the	vault	of	Heav	en.There	stood	a	hill	not	far,	whose	gris	ly	topBelched	fire	and	roll	ing	smoke;	the	rest	en	tireShone	with	a	gloss	y	scurf	un	doubt	ed	signThat	in	his	womb	was	hid	me	tal	lic	o	re,The	work	of	sul	phur.	Thith	er,	winged	with	speed,A	nu	mer	ous	bri	gade	has	tened:	as	when	bandsOf	pi	o	neers,	with	spade	and	pick	axe	armed,Fore	run	the	roy	al	camp,	to	trench	a	field,Or	cast	a	ram	part.	Mam	mon	led	them	on	Mam	mon,	the	least	e	rect	ed	Spir	it	that	fellFrom	Heav	en;	for	e	ven	in	Heav	en	his	looks	and	thoughtsWere	al	ways	down	ward	bent,	ad	mir	ing	moreThe	rich	es	of	heaven's	pave	ment,	trod	den	gold,Than	aught	di	vine	or	ho	ly	else	en	joyedIn	vi	sion	be	a	tif	ic.	By	him	firstMen	al	so,	and	by	his	sug	ges	tion	taught,Ran	sacked	the	cen	tre,	and	with	im	pi	ous	handsRi	fled	the	bow	els	of	their	moth	er	EarthFor	treas	ures	bet	ter	hid.	Soon	had	his	crewO	pened	in	to	the	hill	a	spa	cious	wound,And	digged	out	ribs	of	gold.	Let	none	ad	mireThat	rich	es	grow	in	Hell;	that	soil	may	bestDe	serve	the	pre	cious	bane.	And	here	let	thoseWho	boast	in	mor	tal	things,	and	won	der	ing	tellOf	Ba	bel,	and	the	works	of	Mem	phi	an	kings,Learn	how	their	great	est	mon	u	ments	of	fameAnd	strength,	and	art,	are	eas	i	ly	out	doneBy	Spir	its	rep	ro	bate,	and	in	an	hourWhat	in	an	age	they,	with	in	ces	sant	toilAnd	hands	in	nu	mer	a	ble,	scarce	per	form.Nigh	on	the	plain,	in	man	y	cells	pre	pared,That	un	der	neath	had	veins	of	liq	uid	fireSluiced	from	the	lake,	a	sec	ond	mul	ti	tudeWith	won	drous	art	found	ed	the	mass	y	o	re,Sev	er	ing	each	kind,	and	scummed	the	bul	lion	dross.A	third	as	soon	had	formed	with	in	the	groundA	var	i	ous	mould,	and	from	the	boil	ing	cellsBy	strange	con	vey	ance	filled	each	hol	low	nook;As	in	an	or	gan,	from	one	blast	of	wind,To	man	y	a	row	of	pipes	the	sound	board	breathes.A	non	out	of	the	earth	a	fab	ric	hugeRose	like	an	ex	ha	la	tion,	with	the	soundOf	dul	cet	sym	pho	nies	and	voic	es	sweet	Built	like	a	tem	ple,	where	pi	las	ters	roundWere	set,	and	Dor	ic	pil	lars	o	ver	laidWith	gold	en	ar	chi	trave;	nor	did	there	wantCor	nice	or	frieze,	with	bos	sy	sculp	tures	grav	en;The	roof	was	fret	ted	gold.	Not	Bab	y	lonNor	great	Alcairo	such	mag	nif	i	cenceE	qualled	in	all	their	glo	ries,	to	en	shrineBe	lus	or	Se	ra	pis	their	gods,	or	seatTheir	kings,	when	E	gypt	with	As	syr	i	a	stroveIn	wealth	and	lux	u	ry.	Th'	as	cend	ing	pileStood	fixed	her	state	ly	height,	and	straight	the	doors,O	pen	ing	their	bra	zen	folds,	dis	cov	er,	wideWith	in,	her	am	ple	spac	es	o'er	the	smoothAnd	lev	el	pave	ment:	from	the	arched	roof,Pen	dent	by	sub	tle	mag	ic,	man	y	a	rowOf	star	ry	lamps	and	blaz	ing	cres	sets,	fedWith	naptha	and	asphaltus,	yield	ed	lightAs	from	a	sky.	The	has	ty	mul	ti	tudeAd	mir	ing	en	tered;	and	the	work	some	praise,And	some	the	ar	chi	tect.	His	hand	was	knownIn	Heav	en	by	man	y	a	tow	ered	struc	ture	high,Where	scep	tred	An	gels	held	their	res	i	dence,And	sat	as	Princ	es,	whom	the	su	preme	KingEx	alt	ed	to	such	pow	er,	and	gave	to	rule,Each	in	his	Hi	er	ar	chy,	the	Or	ders	bright.Nor	was	his	name	un	heard	or	un	a	doredIn	an	cient	Greece;	and	in	Ausonian	landMen	called	him	Mul	ci	ber;	and	how	he	fellFrom	Heav	en	they	fa	bled,	thrown	by	an	gry	JoveSheer	o'er	the	crys	tal	bat	tle	ments:	from	mornTo	noon	he	fell,	from	noon	to	dew	y	eve,A	summer's	day,	and	with	the	set	ting	sunDropt	from	the	ze	nith,	like	a	fall	ing	star,On	Lem	nos,	th'	Aegaean	isle.	Thus	they	re	late,Err	ing;	for	he	with	this	re	bel	lious	routFell	long	be	fore;	nor	aught	aviled	him	nowTo	have	built	in	Heav	en	high	tow	ers;	nor	did	he	scapeBy	all	his	en	gines,	but	was	head	long	sent,With	his	in	dus	tri	ous	crew,	to	build	in	Hell.Mean	while	the	winged	Her	alds,	by	com	mandOf	sov	er	eign	pow	er,	with	aw	ful	cer	e	mo	nyAnd	trumpet's	sound,	through	out	the	host	pro	claimA	sol	emn	coun	cil	forth	with	to	be	heldAt	Pan	de	mo	ni	um,	the	high	cap	i	talOf	Sa	tan	and	his	peers.	Their	sum	mons	calledFrom	eve	ry	band	and	squared	reg	i	mentBy	place	or	choice	the	worthi	est:	they	a	nonWith	hun	dreds	and	with	thou	sands	troop	ing	cameAt	tend	ed.	All	ac	cess	was	thronged;	the	gatesAnd	porch	es	wide,	but	chief	the	spa	cious	hall(Though	like	a	cov	ered	field,	where	cham	pi	ons	boldWont	ride	in	armed,	and	at	the	Soldan's	chairDe	fied	the	best	of	Pay	nim	chiv	al	ryTo	mor	tal	com	bat,	or	ca	reer	with	lance),Thick	swarmed,	both	on	the	ground	and	in	the	air,Brushed	with	the	hiss	of	rus	tl	ing	wings.	As	beesIn	spring	time,	when	the	Sun	with	Tau	rus	rides,Pour	forth	their	pop	u	lous	youth	a	bout	the	hiveIn	clus	ters;	they	a	mong	fresh	dews	and	flow	ersFly	to	and	fro,	or	on	the	smoothed	plank,The	sub	urb	of	their	straw	built	cit	a	del,New	rubbed	with	balm,	ex	pa	ti	ate,	and	con	ferTheir	state	af	fairs:	so	thick	the	air	y	crowdSwarmed	and	were	strait	ened;	till,	the	sig	nal	giv	en,Be	hold	a	won	der!	They	but	now	who	seemedIn	big	ness	to	sur	pass	Earth's	gi	ant	sons,Now	less	than	small	est	dwarfs,	in	nar	row	roomThrong	num	ber	less	like	that	pygmean	raceBe	yond	the	In	di	an	mount;	or	fa	e	ry	elves,Whose	mid	night	rev	els,	by	a	for	est	sideOr	foun	tain,	some	be	lat	ed	peas	ant	sees,Or	dreams	he	sees,	while	o	ver	head	the	MoonSits	ar	bi	tress,	and	near	er	to	the	EarthWheels	her	pale	course:	they,	on	their	mirth	and	danceIn	tent,	with	joc	und	mu	sic	charm	his	ear;At	once	with	joy	and	fear	his	heart	re	bounds.Thus	in	cor	po	re	al	Spir	its	to	small	est	formsRe	duced	their	shapes	im	mense,	and	were	at	large,Though	with	out	num	ber	still,	a	midst	the	hallOf	that	in	fer	nal	court.	But	far	with	in,And	in	their	own	di	men	sions	like	them	selves,The	great	Se	raph	ic	Lords	and	Cher	u	bimIn	close	re	cess	and	se	cret	con	clave	sat,A	thou	sand	demi	gods	on	gold	en	seats,Fre	quent	and	full.	Af	ter	short	si	lence	then,And	sum	mons	read,	the	great	con	sult	be	gan.